Eisenstein's Criterion

%
If \(f(x) = \displaystyle\sum_{i=0}^n \alpha_i x^i \in \QQ[x]\) and $\exists p$ such that

- $p$ divides every coefficient *except* $a_n$ and
- $p^2$ does not divide $a_0$,

then $f$ is irreducible.
%
theorem
---

Algebraic Extension
%
A field extension $L/K$ is **algebraic** $\iff$ every $\alpha \in L$ is the root of some polynomial $f(x)\in K[x]$.
%
definition
---

Normal Extension
%
A field extension $L/K$ is **normal** $\iff$ every irreducible $p(x) \in K[x]$ either has no roots in $L$ or splits into linear factors in $L[x]$.
%
definition
---

Separable Extension
%
A field extension $L/K$ is **separable** $\iff$ for every $\alpha \in K$, the $\min_\alpha(x)/K$ is separable (equivalently, has nonzero derivative).
%
definition
---

$K(x)$
%
The field of rational functions, i.e. ratios of polynomials, in the variable $x$; 
\[K(x) = \theset{{P(x) \over Q(x)} \suchthat P,Q \in K[x]}.\]

Example: $\CC(x)$ is the field of meromorphic functions on the Riemann sphere.
%
notation, definition
---

$K[x]$
%
The algebra of polynomials in the variable $x$, i.e. \[K[x] = \theset{\sum_{i=0}^n a_ix^i \suchthat n\in \ZZ^{\geq 0}}.\]
%
notation, definition
---

Irreducible
%
An element $p$ in a ring $R$ is **irreducible** $\iff$ $p=ab \implies a \in R\units$ or $b\in R\units$.
%
definition
---

Cyclotomic Polynomial: $\Phi_p(x)$.
%
$$\Phi_p(x) = 1 + x + x^2 + \cdots + x^{p-1}.$$
%
formula
---

Cyclotomic Polynomial: $\Phi_{2p}(x)$.
%
$$\Phi_{2p}(x) = 1 - x + x^2 - \cdots + x^{p-1}.$$
%
formula
---


Definition: $K[\alpha]$ for $\alpha \in F \supset K$
%
The minimal subring of $F$ generated by $K$ and $\alpha$.
%
definition
---

$K(\alpha)$ for $\alpha \in F\supset K$
%
The minimal *subfield* of $F$ generated by $K$ and $\alpha$ 
%
definition
---

Conjugates of a root
%
For $\alpha\in L$, a **conjugate** of $\alpha$ is any other root of the minimal polynomial of $\alpha$.
%
definition
---

Four Characterizations of Galois extensions $K/F$.
%

1. $K$ is a splitting field of a separable polynomial in $F[x]$.
2. $K$ such that the fixed field of $\aut(K/F)$ is exactly $K$.
3. $K$ such that $[K:F] = \abs{\aut(K/F)}$.
4. $K$ such that $K/F$ is finite, normal, and separable.
%
theorem
---

Definition of Galois group for a **finite** extension $K/F$.
%
$K/F$ is Galois $\iff$ $\abs{\Aut(K/F)} = [K: F]$
%
definition
---

Example of a field extension that is not Galois.
%
$K = \QQ(2^{1\over 3})/\QQ$, since $\abs{\aut(K/\QQ)} = 1$ but this is a degree 3 extension.
%
example
---

Definition: Primitive Root of Unity.
%
$\zeta$ is a *primitive $n$th root of unity* iff $\zeta^n = 1$ and $n$ is the smallest such integer for which this holds.
%
definition
---

Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory
%
Let $K/F$ and $G = \mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$, then there is a bijection
\[  
E \suchthat K/E/F \qquad&\iff\qquad H\suchthat 1\leq H \leq G \\
E &\mapsto \tau\in G,\, \tau\mid_E = \mathrm{id} \\
\text{Fixed field of } H &\mapsto  H
,\]
such that

1. Inclusion reversing: \( E_1 \subseteq E_2  \iff  H_2 \leq H_ 1 \).
2. \( \abs{H} = [K: E] \) and \( [E:F] = [G: H] \)
3. \( K/E \) is always Galois with \( G(K/E) = H\).
4. \( E/F \) is Galois $\iff$ \( H\normal G \), in which case \( G(E/F) \cong G/H \).
5. Compositum correspondences:
  - \( E_1\intersect E_2 \) corresponds to \( \gens{H_1, H_2} \)
  -  \(E_1 E_2  \) corresponds to \( H_1\intersect H_2 \).
%
theorem
---


Definition: Algebraic Element
%
If $L/K$ is a field extension then \( \alpha \in L \) is *algebraic* iff there exists a $g\in K[x]$ such that $g(\alpha) = 0$.
%
definition
---

Definition: irreducible polynomial
%
Nonconstant and can not be factored into two polynomials of smaller degrees.
%
definition
---

Definition: splitting field of a polynomial $f\in k[x]$
%
The smallest extension $F/k$ such that $f$ splits into linear factors in $F[x]$.
%
definition
---

Definition: algebraically closed.
%
Every polynomial has a root.
%
definition
---

Definition: perfect field.
%
Every irreducible polynomial is separable.

Equivalently, the characteristic is zero, or is $p$ where Frobenius is an automorphism.

> All characteristic zero or finite fields are perfect.

%
definition
---

