---
title: "Research::Papers"
---

- What is a K3 surface?

    Complete, smooth, $ \dim_{\mathbf{C}}X = 2 $, $ \omega_{X/k}\cong {\mathcal{O}}_X $, and $ H^1({\mathcal{O}}_X) = 0 $.

    Interpret $ q(X) \coloneqq h^{0, 1}(X) $ as the irregularity.

- What is the signature of a lattice?

    The signature of the associated bilinear form $ \beta $.

    Change variables to write $ \beta(x) = \sum \lambda_i x_i^2 $ where $ \lambda_i \in \left\{{0, \pm 1}\right\} $, then the signature is $ (n_+, n_-) $, the counts of how many times $ +1 $ and $ -1 $ appear respectively.

- What is a positive/negative definite form? A nondegenerate form?

    Positive: $ \lambda_i = +1 $ for all $ i $.

    Negative: $ \lambda_i = -1 $ for all $ i $.

    Nondegenerate: $ \lambda_i \neq 0 $ for all $ i $.

- What is an integral lattice?

    $ {\left\langle {x},~{y} \right\rangle}\in {\mathbf{Z}} $ for all $ x,y\in L $.

- What is a unimodular lattice?

    Integral and generated by columns of a matrix $ M $ with $ \operatorname{det}M = \pm 1 $.

    Volume of fundamental domain is 1.

- Discuss dimensions of unimodular lattices.

    Only possible in dimensions divisible by 8

    $ \dim = 8\implies E_8 $

    $ \dim = 16 \implies \Gamma_8{ {}^{ \scriptscriptstyle\oplus^{2} }  }, \Gamma_{16} $.

    $ \dim = 32 \implies N_i, i\leq 24 $ the Niemeir lattices, including the Leech lattices.

- What is an even lattice?

    $ {\left\lVert {x} \right\rVert}_L \in 2{\mathbf{Z}} $ for any $ x\in L $.

- What are type I/type II lattices?

    Type II $ \iff $ even

    Type I $ \iff $ not even (odd).

- What is the $ E_8 $ lattice?

    The unique positive-definite, even, unimodular lattice of rank 8.

    Points in $ {\mathbf{Z}}^8 $ whose coordinates are either all integers or all half-integers and the sum of coordinates is even.

    Root lattice of $ E_8 $

    $$\left(\begin{array}{cccccccc} 2 & -1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ -1 & 2 & -1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 & 2 & -1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & -1 & 2 & -1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & -1 & 2 & -1 & -1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -1 & 2 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -1 & 0 & 2 & -1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -1 & 2\end{array}\right)$$

- What is a lattice?

    A lattice is a free abelian group with an $ {\mathbf{Z}}{\hbox{-}} $valued symmetric bilinear form.

- What is a root in a lattice?

    A vector $ v\in \Lambda $ with $ v^2 = -2 $.

- What is the hyperbolic lattice $ H $? What is its bilinear form?

    $ (x,y)\mapsto xy $

    $ W(\Lambda){~\trianglelefteq~}{\operatorname{O}}(\Lambda) $ generated by reflections $ v\mapsto v + (v, \delta)\delta $ for $ \delta $ the roots of $ \Lambda $.

- Why is lattice theory important in the study of K3s?

    For $ X $ a smooth K3, $ H^2(X; {\mathbf{Z}}) \cong L_{{\mathsf{K}}3} \coloneqq H{ {}^{ \scriptscriptstyle\oplus^{3} }  } \oplus E_8{ {}^{ \scriptscriptstyle\oplus^{2} }  } $.

- What is the Neron-Severi lattice?

    Generally $ S_X \coloneqq{\operatorname{NS}}(X) = \operatorname{coker}(\operatorname{Pic}^0(X) \hookrightarrow\operatorname{Pic}(X)) $.

- Discuss $ H^{2, 0}(X) $ for $ X $ a K3.

    $ H^{2, 0}(X) = {\mathbf{C}}\omega_X $ for some nowhere vanishing holomorphic 2-form $ \omega_X $

- Discuss $ {\operatorname{NS}}(X) $ for $ X $ a projective K3.

    $ S_X $ is nodegenerate of signature $ (1, r_X - 1) $ where $ r_X \coloneqq\operatorname{rank}{\operatorname{NS}}(X) $ is the Picard number.

    For a K3, By Lefschetz $ (1, 1) $,

    $$\operatorname{Pic}(X) = {\operatorname{NS}}(X) = H^{2, 0}(X)^\perp \cap H^2(X; {\mathbf{Z}}) \subseteq H^2(X; {\mathbf{C}})$$

- What is the transcendental lattice? Its signature?

    $ T_X = (S_X)^\perp \subseteq H^2(X; {\mathbf{Z}}) $ the orthgonal complement of Neron-Severi.

    Signature $ (2, 20-r_X) $

- What is the Kahler cone $ {\mathcal{K}}_X $?

    $ {\mathcal{K}}_X \subseteq H^{1, 1}(X; {\mathbf{R}}) $ the set of Kahler forms, forms an open convex cone.

- What is a non-symplectic automorphism?

    $ \sigma: X\to X $ with finite order $ n > 1 $ where $ \sigma^*(\omega_X) = \zeta_n \omega_X $ for some primitive root of unity $ \zeta_n $, where $ \omega_X \in H^{2, 0}(X) $ is a nonzero 2-form.

- What is a marking of a K3?

    Let $ X $ be a K3 surface. A marking is an isometry $ \phi: H^2(X, \mathbb{Z}) \rightarrow L $.

- What is the period domain $ \mathbb{D} $?

    $$\mathbb{D}=\mathbb{P}\left\{x \in L_{\mathbb{C}} \mathrel{\Big|}x \cdot x=0, x \cdot \overline{x}>0\right\}, \quad \operatorname{dim} \mathbb{D}=20$$

- Discuss the moduli space of marked K3s.

    Admits a fine moduli space $ {\mathcal{M}} $

    Has a surjective etale period map

    $$\begin{align}\pi: {\mathcal{M}}&\to \mathbb{D}\\ (X, \phi) &\mapsto \phi(H^{2, 0}(X)) \in {\mathbf{P}}(L\otimes{\mathbf{C}})\end{align}$$

    Non-Hausdorff 20-dimensional $ {\mathbf{C}}{\hbox{-}} $manifold.

    $ \pi_0 {\mathcal{M}}= \left\{{{\mathcal{M}}_-, {\mathcal{M}}_+}\right\} $ two isomorphic connected components where are exchanged under $ (X, \phi)\rightleftharpoons(X, -\phi) $.

- For $ \rho \in {\operatorname{O}}(L) $, what is a $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $marking?

    A $ \rho $-marking of $ (X, \sigma) $ is an isometry $ \phi: H^2(X, \mathbb{Z}) \rightarrow L $ such that $ \sigma^*=\phi^{-1} \circ \rho \circ \phi $. We say that $ (X, \sigma) $ is $ \rho $-markable if it admits a $ \rho $-marking.

- What is a family of $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $marked surfaces?

    A smooth morphism $ f:({\mathcal{X}}, \sigma_B) \to B $

    An automorphism $ \sigma_B \in \mathop{\mathrm{Aut}}(X) $ over $ B $

    An isomorphism f local systems $ \phi_S: {\mathbf{R}}^2f_* \underline{{\mathbf{Z}}} \to L\otimes\underline{{\mathbf{Z}}}_B $ where every fiber is a K3 with a $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $marking.

- What are the moduli stacks $ {\mathcal{M}}_\rho, F_\rho $?

    Moduli of $ \rho $`{\hbox{-}}`{=tex}$marked resp. $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $markable K3 surfaces, where e.g. $ {\mathcal{M}}_\rho(B) $ is the groupoid of $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $marked familes over $ B $.

- How are deformation classes of K3 surfaces with nonsymplectic automorphisms $ (X, \sigma) $ classified?

    Primitive 2-elementary hyperbolic sublattices $ S \subseteq L_{{\mathsf{K}}3} $.

- What is a stable pair $ (S, {\varepsilon}D) $? Give an example.

    slc singularities and $ {\mathsf{K}}_S + {\varepsilon}D \in {\mathbf{Q}}{\hbox{-}}\operatorname{CDiv}(X)^{\mathrm{amp}} $.

    Any K3 $ X $ with ADE singularities and any effective ample divisor $ R $, since $ \omega_X\cong {\mathcal{O}}_X \implies $ canonical singularities and there are no log centers.

- What is a stable slc surface pair?

    A stable slc surface pair is a pair $ (S, \epsilon D) $, where

    $ S $ is a connected, reduced, projective Gorenstein surface $ S $ with $ \omega_S \simeq \mathcal{O}_S $ which has semi log canonical singularities.

    $ D $ is an effective ample Cartier divisor on $ S $ that does not contain any log canonical centers of $ S $.

    Thus $ (S, \exp D) $ is stable for small $ {\varepsilon}> 0 \in {\mathbf{Q}} $.

- What is a canonical choice of polarizing divisor?

    An algebraically varying big and nef $ R \in \operatorname{Div}(U) $ for $ U $ a Zariski dense subset of $ F_\rho $.

- What is a Kulikov model?

    Let $ (C, 0) $ be the germ of a smooth curve at $ 0 $ and $ C^* = C\setminus\left\{{0}\right\} $ and let $ X^* \to C^* $ be a family of algebraic K3s.

    $ X \to (C, 0) $ which extends $ X^* \to C^* $ where $ X $ is a smooth algebraic space,

    $ K_X \sim_C 0 $,

    $ X_0 $ has reduced normal crossings

- What are Types I, II, II of Kulikov models?

    I: $ X_0 $ smooth,

    II: $ X_0 $ has double curves but no triple points,

    III: $ X_0 $ has triple points

- What is a Kulikov surface?

    $ X_0 $ the central fiber of a Kulikov model.

- What is Kulikov's key result on degenerations of K3s?

    For $ Y^*\to C^* $ a family, there is a finite base change $ (C', 0) \to (C, 0) $ and a birational modifcation of its pullback $ Y'\dashrightarrow X $ such that $ X $ has smooth total space, $ K_X \sim_{C'} 0 $, and $ X_0 $ is reduced normal crossings.

- What are the log monodromies for Kulikov degenerations.

    Define $ N \coloneqq\log T = (T-I) - {1\over 2}(T-I)^2 + \cdots $

    Type I $ \implies N = 0 $.

    Type II $ \implies N\neq 0, N^2 = 0 $.

    Type III $ \implies N \neq 0, N^2 \neq 0, N^3=0 $.

    $ N $ is always integral and of the form

    $$Nx = (x\cdot \lambda)\delta - (x\cdot \delta)\lambda,\qquad \delta\in H^2(X_t; {\mathbf{Z}}), \lambda \in \delta^\perp/\delta$$

- What is a **recognizable divisor**?

    A canonical choice of polarizing divisor $ R $ for $ U \subset F_\rho $ is **recognizable** if

    For every Kulikov surface $ X_0 $ of Type I, II, or III which smooths to some $ \rho $-markable $ \mathrm{K} 3 $ surface,

    There is a divisor $ R_0 \subset X_0 $ such that on any smoothing into $ \rho $-markable K3 surfaces $ X \rightarrow(C, 0) $ with $ C^* \subset U $,

    The divisor $ R_0 $ is, up to the action of$ \mathop{\mathrm{Aut}}^0\left(X_0\right) $, the flat limit of $ R_t $ for $ t \neq 0 \in C^* $.

- When is $ G\subseteq \mathop{\mathrm{Aut}}(X) $ nonsymplectic?

    $ G\curvearrowright H^{2, 0}(X) = {\mathbf{C}}\omega_X $ gives a SES

    $$G_0 \hookrightarrow G \twoheadrightarrow\mu_n,\qquad \mu_n\in {{\mathbf{C}}^{\times}}$$

    and $ G $ is non symplectic if $ G\ne G_0 $.

- What is a $ (\rho, \chi){\hbox{-}} $marking of $ (X, \sigma) $

    Let $ \rho: G\hookrightarrow{\operatorname{O}}(L) $ be finite subgroup, $ \chi: G\to {{\mathbf{C}}^{\times}} $ a character, and $ \sigma: G\to \mathop{\mathrm{Aut}}(X) $.

    Marking: an isometry $ H^2(X; {\mathbf{Z}}) \to L $ where $ \phi \circ \sigma(g)^* = \rho(g) \circ \phi $ such that the induced character $ \alpha: G\to {{\mathbf{C}}^{\times}} $ equals $ \chi $.

- What is a family of $ (\rho, \chi){\hbox{-}} $marked K3s?

    A smooth model $ (\chi, \sigma_B, \phi_B) \xrightarrow{f} B $ where $ \sigma_B: G\to \mathop{\mathrm{Aut}}({\mathcal{X}}/B) $ and $ \phi_B: {\mathbf{R}}^2 f_* \underline{{\mathbf{Z}}} \to L\otimes\underline{{\mathbf{Z}}}_B $ where every fiber is a $ (\rho, \chi){\hbox{-}} $marked surface.

- What is the change-of-markings group?

    $ \Gamma_\rho \coloneqq\left\{{\gamma\in {\operatorname{O}}(L) {~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}\gamma\circ \rho = \rho \circ \gamma}\right\} $.

- What is a semitoroidal compactification?

    Simultaneously generalizes BB and toroidal comactifications.

- What is $ F_{2d} $?

    Moduli of polarized K3s $ (X, L) $,

    ADE singularities,

    $ L\in \operatorname{Pic}(X)^{{\mathrm{amp}}, {\operatorname{prim}}} $ with $ L^2 = 2d $

- What is $ F_\rho $?

    Moduli of $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $markable K3s.

- What is $ F_\rho^{\mathrm{ade}} $?

    $ (\mathbb{D}_\rho \setminus\Delta_\rho)/\Gamma_\rho $

    Obtained from smooth K3s by contractin $ (-2){\hbox{-}} $curves orthogonal to $ C_1 \in  \mathrm{Fix}(\sigma) $ with $ g\geq 2 $

    Has a separated stack.

- What is $ \overline{F_\rho}^\mathrm{slc} $?

    The geometrically meaningful compactification Valery constructs, stable pairs w/automorphisms

    Main theorem: is a semitoroidal comapctification of $ \mathbb{D}_\rho/\Gamma_\rho $.

- What are the lattice signatures for $ S_X, T_X $?

    $ S_X: (1, \rho - 1) $

    $ T_X: (2, 20-\rho) $.

- What is $ \Delta_\rho $?

    Discriminant locus: $ \mathbb{D}_\rho \cap\bigcup_{\text{roots }\delta \in (L^G)^\perp} \delta^\perp $.

    $ L^G \coloneqq \mathrm{Fix}(\rho) \subset S_\rho $ the fixed classes for $ G = \left\langle{\rho}\right\rangle $

    $ L \coloneqq\Lambda_{\mathrm{K3}} $.

    $ S_\rho \coloneqq T_\rho^\perp $, $ T_\rho \coloneqq L^{\operatorname{prim}}_{\mathbf{C}}\cap L $ generic Picard/transcendental lattices.

    $ L^{\operatorname{prim}}_{\mathbf{C}} $ the sum of primitive eigenspaces of $ \rho $.

- How does an involution act on $ H^2 $?

    Fixes $ S_X $ and acts by $ \cdot(-1) $ on $ T_X $.

- Classify $ (X, \sigma) $ with $ \sigma $ an involution, up to deformation.

    Primitive 2-elementary sublattices $ S \leq \Lambda_{\mathrm{K3}} $, classified by Nikulin using $ (g, k, \delta) $, 75 cases.

- What is the Picard number $ \rho(X) $?

    For $ X $ compact complex,

    $$\rho(X) \coloneqq\operatorname{rank}_{\mathbf{Z}}\operatorname{im}(\operatorname{Pic}(X) \to H^{1, 1}(X))$$

    If $ X $ is Kahler, $ \rho(X) = \operatorname{rank}H^{1,1}(X) = \operatorname{rank}{\operatorname{NS}}(X) $.

- What is the Jacobian of a complex manifold?

    $$\operatorname{Jac}(X) \coloneqq H^1({\mathcal{O}}_X)/H^1(X; {\mathbf{Z}})\cong \ker(\operatorname{Pic}(X) \to H^2(X; {\mathbf{Z}})) \cong \operatorname{Pic}^0(X)$$

    The continuous part of $ \operatorname{Pic}(X) $.

- What is primitive cohomology?

    Let $ (X, g) $ be a compact Khler manifold. Then the primitive cohomology is defined as

    $$H^k(X, \mathbb{R})_{{\operatorname{prim}}}:=\operatorname{Ker}\left(\Lambda: H^k(X, \mathbb{R}) \longrightarrow H^{k-2}(X, \mathbb{R})\right)$$

    and

    $$H^{p, q}(X)_{{\operatorname{prim}}}:=\operatorname{Ker}\left(\Lambda: H^{p, q}(X) \longrightarrow H^{p-1, q-1}(X)\right)$$

    s

    I.e. any Kahler class induces a representation of $ {\mathfrak{sl}}_2({\mathbf{C}}) $ on $ H^*(X; {\mathbf{R}}) $.

- For $ \rho \in {\operatorname{O}}(L) $, what is a $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $marking of $ (X, \sigma) $? What is $ \rho{\hbox{-}} $markable?

    An isometry $ \phi: H^2(X, \mathbb{Z}) \rightarrow \Lambda_{\mathrm{K3}} $ such that $ \sigma^*=\phi^{-1} \circ \rho \circ \phi $.

    We say that $ (X, \sigma) $ is $ \rho $-markable if it admits a $ \rho $-marking.

- Give an example of a stable slc pair.

    Any K3 $ X $ with ADE singularities and any effective ample divisor $ R $,

    CY: $ \omega_X\cong {\mathcal{O}}_X $

    Has canonical singularities, better than slc

    No log centers.

- What is the importance of a regognizable divisor?

    If $ R $ is recognizable, then $ \overline{F_\rho}^{\mathrm{slc}} $ is a semitoroidal compactification of $ F_\rho $ for a unique semifan $ {\mathcal{F}}_R $.

- What is the Baily-Borel compactification associated to a lattice $ N $ with isometry $ \rho $?

    $ \mathbb{D}_N \coloneqq\left\{{x\in {\mathbf{P}}(N\otimes{\mathbf{C}}){~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}x^2=0, {\left\lvert {x} \right\rvert} > 0}\right\} $ a type IV domain

    $ \mathbb{D}_\rho = \left\{{x\in {\mathbf{P}}(N\otimes{\mathbf{C}})^{\zeta_n} {~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}{\left\lvert {x} \right\rvert} > 0}\right\} $ a Type I subdomain

    $ \tilde \Gamma_\rho \coloneqq Z_{{\operatorname{O}}(N)}(\rho)\curvearrowright\mathbb{D}_\rho $, and also for any finite index subgroup $ \Gamma $.

    Set $ \overline{\mathbb{D}_\rho} $ the closure of the compact dual (dropping $ {\left\lvert {x} \right\rvert} > 0 $)

    Define $ \overline{\mathbb{D}_\rho}^\mathrm{BB} = \mathbb{D}_\rho \cup\bigcup_{J} B_J $ by adding *rational boundary components*, usually $ {\mathbb{H}}{\textstyle\coprod}(-{\mathbb{H}}) $ or points.s

    BB compactification is $ \overline{\mathbb{D}_\rho/\Gamma}\coloneqq\overline{\mathbb{D}_\rho}^{\mathrm{BB}}/\Gamma $.
