---
title: "Orals::Curves and Surfaces"
---

- What is **Zariski's main theorem**?

    For $ f:X\overset{\sim}{\dashrightarrow}Y $ a birational projective morphism of Noetherian integral schemes with $ Y $ normal, every fiber $ f^{-1}(y) $ is connected.

    For $ T:X\to Y $ a birational morphism of projective varieties with $ X $ normal and $ p $ a *fundamental point* of $ T $, then the total transform $ T(p) $ is connected of dimension $ d\geq 1 $. ($ T $ is defined on some largest open $ U\subseteq X $, and $ X\setminus U $ are the fundamental points. Here the total transform is $ T(p) \coloneqq p_2 p_1^{-1}(p) $ where $ \Gamma_\phi \subset U \times Y \xrightarrow{p_1, p_2} U, Y $ is the graph of a representative $ \phi: U\to Y $.)

- Discuss Zariski's main theorem.

    Used to factor birational transformations of surfaces: if $ f:X' \to X $ is a birational transformation of smooth projective surfaces and $ p $ is a fundamental point of $ f^{-1} $, then $ f $ factors through the blowup $ \pi: \operatorname{Bl}_p X \to X $. So any birational transformation $ T: X_1\to X_2 $ can be factored as a finite sequence of blowups and blowdowns.

- Need a surface have finitely many **exceptional curves of the first kind**?

    No: $ \operatorname{Bl}_n {\mathbf{P}}^2 $ for $ n\geq 9 $ has infinitely many.

- Discuss **classification of surfaces**.

    Define $ \kappa(X) \coloneqq[\bigoplus_{n\geq 0} H^0({\mathcal{O}}_X(nK_X)):\, k]_{\mathrm{trdeg}} $.

    $ \kappa = -1 $: Rational or ruled surfaces

    $ \kappa = 0 $: K3, Enriques, AV, or hyperelliptic surfaces

    $ \kappa=1 $: Elliptic surfaces

    $ \kappa=2 $: Surfaces of general type

- Show that a line bundle is globally generated iff basepoint free.

    Globally generated: $ \exists {\mathcal{O}}_X{ {}^{ \scriptscriptstyle\oplus^{I} }  } \twoheadrightarrow L $ a surjection of sheaves; bpf means $ \forall x\in X \exists s\in H^0(L) $ such that $ s_x\not\in {\mathfrak{m}}_x \subseteq {\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $, so $ s_x $ is a unit and $ L_x\cong {\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $ is generated by $ s_x $ as an $ {\mathcal{O}}_{X, x}{\hbox{-}} $module. If $ L $ is bpf, for each $ x_i\in X $ choose $ s_i\in H^0(L) $ so the image $ s(x_i) \in L_{x_i} $ is nonzero and assemble $ \left\{{s_i}\right\} $ into a map $ {\mathcal{O}}_{X}{ {}^{ \scriptscriptstyle\oplus^{{\left\lvert {X} \right\rvert}} }  } \to L $ -- this is surjective on stalks, since the fibers are 1-dimensional and thus generated by any nonzero element, and thus surjective.

- Give an example of globally generated $ \neq $ basepoint free for general sheaves.

    Take any $ {\mathcal{F}} $ which is not globally generated and set $ L = {\mathcal{O}}_X \oplus {\mathcal{F}} $. Then $ L $ is bpf since $ {\mathcal{O}}_X $ is but not globally generated since $ {\mathcal{F}} $ is not. Similarly the zero sheaf is globally generated but not bpf.

- What is a **hyperelliptic curve**?

    $ g\geq 2 $ and admits a finite degree 2 morphism $ f:X\to {\mathbf{P}}^1 $.

- What is the ideal sheaf for $ C\hookrightarrow S $ a curve in a surface? What is $ I/I^2 $?

    $ {\mathcal{I}}_C = {\mathcal{O}}_S(-C) $ and $ {\mathcal{I}}_C/{\mathcal{I}}_C^2 = {\mathcal{O}}_S(-C)\otimes{\mathcal{O}}_C $.

- What is the canonical for $ {\mathbf{P}}^2 $? What is its self-intersection?

    $ K = -3H $ so $ K^2 = 9 $.

- When is $ K_C $ very ample?

    For $ g\geq 2 $, $ K_C $ is very ample iff $ C $ is not hyperlliptic (admits a finite morphism $ C\to {\mathbf{P}}^2 $ of degree 2).

- When is $ K_C $ BPF?

    For any $ C $ with $ g(C) \geq 2 $. True because $ \dim{\left\lvert {K-p} \right\rvert} = \dim {\left\lvert {K} \right\rvert} - 1 $, using that $ \dim {\left\lvert {K} \right\rvert} = h^0(\omega_C)-1 = g-1 $, $ \dim {\left\lvert {p} \right\rvert} = 0 $ since $ C $ is not rational, and apply RR to get $ \dim {\left\lvert {K-p} \right\rvert}=g-2 $.

- What is the **canonical embedding**? What is its degree?

    For $ C $ hyperelliptic with $ g\geq 3 $, the embedding determined by $ K_C $ which is very ample. Is degree $ 2g-2 $.

- What is the **Riemann-Roch** theorem for curves?

    $ \chi({\mathcal{O}}_C(D)) = \deg D + (1-g) $. How to remember: $ D= 0 $ yields $ h^0({\mathcal{O}}) - h^1({\mathcal{O}}) = 1-g $ and $ h^1({\mathcal{O}}) = h^{0, 1} = h^{1,0} = h^0(\Omega) = p_g(C) $, the geometric genus, and $ H^0({\mathcal{O}}) = k $ for a proper curve. More generally, $ h^0(D) - h^0(K-D) = \deg(D) + (1-g) $.

- How is RR proved?

    Show for $ D=0 $, then show it holds for $ D $ iff for $ D+p $ for $ p\in C $ any point.

    For $ D=0 $: the formula is $ \chi({\mathcal{O}}_X) = 0+1-g $ which is true since the LHS is $ h^0({\mathcal{O}}_X) = \dim_k k = 1, h^1({\mathcal{O}}_X) = g $.

    For $ D+P $: take $ {\mathcal{L}}(-p)\hookrightarrow{\mathcal{O}}_X \twoheadrightarrow\iota^p_* k $ where $ \iota^p: \left\{{p}\right\}\hookrightarrow C $ so the last term is the skyscraper sheaf for $ k $ at $ p $.

    Twist by $ {\mathcal{L}}(D+p) $ to get $ {\mathcal{L}}(D) \hookrightarrow{\mathcal{L}}(D+p) \twoheadrightarrow\iota^p_* k $ and $ \chi({\mathcal{L}}(D+p)) = \chi({\mathcal{L}}(D)) + \chi(\iota^p_* k) = \chi({\mathcal{L}}(D)) + 1 $ and conclude using $ \deg(D+p) = \deg D + 1 $.

- What is the **Riemann-Hurwitz** theorem for curves?

    $$\chi(X) = \deg(f)\cdot\chi(Y) + \deg R,\qquad \deg R = \sum_{p\in X} (e_p-1)$$

- What is the **ramification index** $ e_p $?

    For a finite morphism $ f:X\to Y $ of curves and $ p\in X, q=f(p)\in Y $, let $ t\in {\mathcal{O}}_{f(x), Y} $ be a local parameter, push to $ {\mathcal{O}}_{p X} $ via $ f^\sharp: {\mathcal{O}}_{f(x), Y} \to {\mathcal{O}}_{p, X} $ and define $ e_p \coloneqq v_p(t) $ where $ v_p $ is the valuation in the DVR $ {\mathcal{O}}_{p, X} $. If $ e_p > 1 $ then $ f $ is ramified at $ p $ and $ f(p) $ is a branch point; if $ e_p = 1 $ then $ f $ is unramified at $ p $.

- What is **tame/wild ramification**?

    For $ \operatorname{ch}k = 0 $ or $ p $ where $ p\not\mathrel{\Big|}e_p $, **tame**. Otherwise if $ \operatorname{ch}k = 0 $ with $ p\mathrel{\Big|}e_p $, **wild**.

- Why is Riemann-Hurwitz true?

    Take degrees in $ K_X \sim f^* K_Y + R $ where $ R \coloneqq\sum_{p\in X} \mathop{\mathrm{length}}(\Omega_{X/Y})_p\cdot p $ is the ramification divisor.

- What is $ \deg K_C $ for $ C $ a curve?

    Set $ D=K $ to get $ h^0(K) - h^0(0) = \deg K + 1-g $, note $ h^0(K) = p_g(C) = g $ and $ h^0(0) = 1 $ to get $ g-1 = \deg K + 1-g \implies \deg K = 2g-2 $.

- What is a **special/nonspecial divisor**?

    $ D $ Special: $ h^0(K-D) > 0 $, nonspecial otherwise.

- Give an example of a nonspecial divisor.

    $ D $ with $ \deg D \geq 2g-2 $, then $ \deg (K-D) < 0 \implies h^0(K-D) = 0 $.

- What is $ \deg K_C $ for $ C $ an elliptic curve?

    $ \deg K_C = 2g-2 = 0 $.

- How is the canonical divisor changed under a morphism of curves?

    For $ f: X\to Y $ finite separable, $ K_X \sim f^* K_Y + R $ the ramification divisor.

- When is $ D\in \operatorname{Div}(C) $ **basepoint free**?

    The complete linear system $ {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} $ is BPF iff $ \forall p\in C $, $ \dim{\left\lvert {D-p} \right\rvert} = \dim{\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert}-1 $, so the dimension drops by exactly one.

    Holds if $ \deg D \geq 2g $: check that $ h^0(K-D) = h^0(K-(D-p)) = 0 $ since $ \deg(K-D) \leq 2g-2-2g \leq -2 < 0 $ and $ \deg(K-(D-p)) \leq 2g-2-2g+1 \leq -1 < 0 $. Apply RR twice, first to $ D $ and then to $ D-p $:

    $$h^0(D) + h^0(K-D) = \deg(D) + 1-g \implies \dim {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} + 0 = \deg(D) + 1-g$$

    so $ \dim{\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} = \deg(D) + 1-g $, and

    $$h^0(D-p) + h^0(K-(D-p)) = \deg(D-p) + 1-g = \deg(D) -1 + 1 - g = \deg(D) -g$$

    so

    $$\begin{align*}\dim{\left\lvert {D-p} \right\rvert} &= \deg(D) - g \\ \implies \deg(D) &= \dim{\left\lvert {D-p} \right\rvert} + g \\ \implies \dim {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} &= \qty{\dim {\left\lvert {D-p} \right\rvert} + g} + 1-g \\ \implies \dim {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} &= \dim {\left\lvert {D-p} \right\rvert}+1\end{align*}$$

- When is $ D\in\operatorname{Div}(C) $ **very ample**?

    Iff $ \forall p, q\in C $ (including $ p=q $), $ \dim {\left\lvert {D-p-q} \right\rvert} = {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} - 2 $.

    Holds if $ \deg D \geq 2g+1 $: Check that $ D $ and $ D-p-q $ are nonspecial since

    $$\deg(K-D) \leq 2g-2-(2g+1) \leq -3$$

    and

    $$\deg(K-(D-p-q)) \leq 2g-2-(2g+1-1-1) \leq -1,$$

    so RR gives

    $$\begin{align*}h^0(D) &= \deg(D) + 1-g \\h^0(D-p-q) &= \deg(D-p-q) + 1-g = \deg(D) -1-g \\ \\\implies h^0(D) - h^0(D-p-q) &=(1-g) - (-1-g) = 2\end{align*}$$

- When is $ D\in \operatorname{Div}(C) $ **ample**?

    Iff $ \deg (D) > 0 $. $ \implies $: $ D $ ample $ \implies nD $ very ample $ \implies nD\sim H $ for $ H $ a hyperplane section of the embedding and $ \deg H > 0\implies \deg(D) > 0 $. $ \impliedby $: $ \deg(D) > 0\implies nD \geq 2g+1 $ for $ n\gg 0 $ $ \implies nD $ is very ample (by the RR criterion).

- Discuss ampleness of divisors in $ {\mathbf{P}}^1 $.

    $ \deg D \geq 1 \iff $ample $ \iff $ very ample.

- If $ D $ is a very ample divisor, discuss $ \deg \phi $ for $ \phi: C\to {\mathbf{P}}^N $.

    $ \deg \phi = \deg D $.

- What is the **classification of curves in $ {\mathbb{P}}^n $**?

    There is a point $ O\in {\mathbf{P}}^3\setminus X $ such that projection away from $ O $ gives a birational morphism $ X\overset{\sim}{\dashrightarrow}X'\subseteq {\mathbf{P}}^2 $ where $ X' $ is at worst nodal. Thus any curve (at all) is birational to a nodal curve.

- What is the **adjunction formula** for smooth curves on surfaces?

    $$2g-2 = C.(C+K_X).$$

- What is the **adjunction formula** for divisors?

    For $ X $ smooth projective and $ D $ a smooth prime divisor,

    $$K_D = (K_X +D)\mathrel{\Big|}_D.$$

- How is the **degree of curve** on a surface defined?

    Fix an ample divisor $ H $, then $ C.H $ is the degree of $ C $ in the projective embedding determined by $ H $, so define $ \deg C = C.H $.

- When is a divisor on a surface **ample**?

    $ D $ is ample iff $ D^2 > 0 $ and $ D.C > 0 $ for all irreducible curves in $ X $.

- Discuss formulas for blowups.

    For $ \tilde X \xrightarrow{\pi} X $, $ C.D = (\pi^* C).(\pi^* D) $, $ (\pi^* C). E= 0 $, $ E^2 = -1 $, and $ (\pi^* C).D = C.(\pi_* D) $. For canonicals, $ K_{\tilde X}^2 = K_X^2 - 1 $ and $ K_{\tilde X} = \pi^* K_X + E $, and $ \operatorname{Pic}\tilde X = \left\langle{E}\right\rangle_{\mathbf{Z}}\oplus \operatorname{Pic}X $.

- What is the **strict transform**?

    For $ \tilde X\to X $ a blowup at $ p $ and $ C\subset X $, the closure $ \tilde C $ in $ \tilde X $ of $ \pi^{-1}(C\cap(X\setminus p)) $. Informally: $ \tilde C = \pi^* C \setminus E $.

- What is the **genus-degree formula** for curves in $ {\mathbf{P}}^2 $?

    $$g = {1\over 2}(d-1)(d-2)$$

    Prove by adjunction: $ 2g-2 = C.(C+K_{{\mathbf{P}}^2}) = C.(C-3H) = d(d-3) $ and rearrange.
