---
title: "Orals::Divisors"
---

- What is a **rational section** of a line bundle?

    A pair $ (s, U) $ with $ U\subseteq X $ open containing all associated points of $ X $, $ s\in H^0(U; {\mathcal{L}}) $, and $ (s_1, U_1) \sim (s_2, U_2) \iff $ $ s_1=s_2 $ on $ U_{12} $.

- How are Weil divisors related to 1Cartier divisors?

    Coincide when $ X $ is integral, separated, Noetherian, locally factorial (local rings are UFDs), and principal divisors coincide as well. In general one has a map $ \operatorname{CDiv}(X) \to \operatorname{Div}(X) $ where $ D $ defined by $ \left\{{(U_i, f_i)}\right\} $ is mapped to $ \sum_{Y\in \operatorname{Div}(X)} v_Y(f_i) Y $ where $ i $ is any index where $ U_i \cap Y $ is nonempty. The inverse construction: given $ D\in \operatorname{Div}(X) $, it induces $ D_x \in \operatorname{Spec}{\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $, which is a UFD so $ D_x $ is a principal divisor $ D_x = (f_x) $ where $ f_x \in K(X) $. Lift to a principal divisor $ (f_x) $ on $ X $; its restriction to $ \operatorname{Spec}{\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $ coincides with $ D $ so they differ only by prime divisors that don't pass through $ x $. Only finitely many such primes have nonzero coefficients in $ D $ or $ (f_x) $, so there is an open $ U_x \ni x $ such that $ D $ and $ (f_x) $ restrict to the same divisor. Now cover $ X $ by the $ U_x $ and use the $ f_x $ to defined a Cartier divisor.

- What is the Cartier divisor associated to a rational section of an invertible sheaf?

    Rational section: $ s: X\to {\mathcal{L}} $ defined on an open dense subset. For any $ Y\in \operatorname{Div}(X) $ one can define $ v_Y(s) $ for a section, so define $ (s) \coloneqq\sum_{Y\in \operatorname{Div}(X)} v_Y(s) Y $. The valuation is defined using $ {\mathcal{L}}_{X, Y} \to {\mathcal{O}}_{X, Y} $ which is a valuation ring when $ X $ is integral.

- What is $ {\mathcal{O}}(D) $?

    $ {\mathcal{O}}(D) \coloneqq\left\{{f\in K(X)^{\times}{~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}(f) + D \geq 0}\right\} $.

- Show that every degree zero divisor on $ {\mathbf{P}}^1 $ is principal.

    Any $ p_1, p_2 $ are linarly equivalent by taking $ f(z) = {z-a\over z-b} $.

- Show that not every degree zero divisor on an elliptic curve is principal. What is $ \operatorname{Pic}(E) $?

    Take $ p_1\neq p_2 $, then if $ p_1-p_2 = (f) $ for some $ f: E\to {\mathbf{P}}^1 $ this produces an injective holomorphic map and forces $ E\cong {\mathbf{P}}^1 $; however e.g. $ g(E) = 1\neq 0 = g({\mathbf{P}}^1) $. In general $ \operatorname{Pic}(E) \cong \operatorname{Pic}^0(E) \oplus {\mathbf{Z}}\cong E\oplus {\mathbf{Z}} $.

- Show that if $ D = V(f) $ is a hypersuface in $ {\mathbf{P}}^n $ then $ D\sim \deg(f) H $, so $ \operatorname{Pic}({\mathbf{P}}^n) = \left\langle{H}\right\rangle_{\mathbf{Z}} $.

    Let $ d\coloneqq\deg f $ and $ H = V(x_0) $, then $ D - dH = (g) $ where $ g(x_0,\cdots, x_n) = {f(x_0,\cdots, x_n) \over x_0^d} $.

- Give a definition of **very ample divisors** in terms of hyperplane sections.

    $ D\in \operatorname{Div}(X) $ is very ample iff $ D \sim D' $ where $ D' $ is the divisor of a hyperplane section under an embedding $ X\hookrightarrow{\mathbf{P}}^n $.

- What is a **prime** divisor?

    A closed integral subscheme $ Y\leq X $ of dimension 1.

- What is a **Weil** divisor?

    The free $ {\mathbf{Z}}{\hbox{-}} $module on prime divisors, so $ D = \sum_{i\in I} n_i Y_i $ where $ I $ indexes prime divisors.

- What is an **effective** divisor?

    $ n_i\geq 0 $ for all $ i $.

- What is the **divisor of a rational function** $ f\in K(X) $?

    $ (f) \coloneqq\sum_{i\in I} v_{Y_i}(f) Y_i $ where $ v_Y $ is a valuation: for $ Y $ prime, let $ \eta $ be its generic point, then $ {\mathcal{O}}_{Y, \eta} $ is a DVR $ R $ with $ \operatorname{ff}(R) = K(X) $ and discrete valuation $ v_Y $. It's a theorem that $ v_Y(f) = 0 $ for almost all $ Y $.

- What is a **principal** divisor?

    Any $ D $ of the form $ D = (f) $ for $ f\in K(X) $.

- What is **linear equivalence** of divisors?

    $ D \sim D' $ iff $ D-D' = (f) $ for some $ f\in K(X)^{\times} $.

- What is the **divisor class group** $ \operatorname{Cl}(X) $?

    $  \operatorname{Cl}(X) = \operatorname{coker}(K(X)^{\times}\xrightarrow{ ({-})} \operatorname{Div}(X)) $, i.e. Weil divisors modulo linear equivalence.

- Discuss $ \operatorname{Cl}(X) $.

    For $ A $ a Noetherian domain, $ A $ is a UFD iff $ \operatorname{Spec}A $ is normal and $  \operatorname{Cl}(\operatorname{Spec}A) = 0 $.

    This follows from the equivalence $ A $ is a UFD iff every prime ideal of height 1 is principal.

    $  \operatorname{Cl}({\mathbf{A}}^n) $ is zero since $ k[x_1, \cdots, x_{n}] $ is a UFD, $  \operatorname{Cl}({\mathbf{P}}^n_{/ {k}}) \cong k $ generated by a hyperplane, induced by the degree morphism.

    For $ Z\leq X $ proper closed and $ U\coloneqq X\setminus Z $, $  \operatorname{Cl}(X) \twoheadrightarrow \operatorname{Cl}(U) $ by taking $ \sum n_i Y_i \mapsto \sum n_i (Y_i \cap Z) $ and is injective if $ \operatorname{codim}_X(Z) \geq 2 $. If $ Z $ is irreducible of codimension 1, then one gets a right-SES $ {\mathbf{Z}}\to  \operatorname{Cl}(X) \twoheadrightarrow \operatorname{Cl}(U) $.

- Is $ \operatorname{Cl}(X) $ always free?

    No, it can contain torsion: let $ Y\subseteq {\mathbf{P}}^2 $ be an irreducible curve of degree $ d $ and let $ X\coloneqq{\mathbf{P}}^2\setminus Y $, then $ {\mathbf{Z}}\xrightarrow{\times d}  \operatorname{Cl}({\mathbf{P}}^2)\cong {\mathbf{Z}}\twoheadrightarrow \operatorname{Cl}({\mathbf{P}}^2\setminus Y) \implies  \operatorname{Cl}(X) \cong C_d $

- What are minimal conditions for which it makes sense to discuss Weil divisors?

    Hartshorne's condition $ (*) $: Noetherian, integral, separated, regular in codimension 1.

- Discuss **complete divisors** on a smooth complete curve.

    Every principal divisor has degree zero: use the general result that if $ \Phi: X\to Y $ is a finite morpism of curves, $ \deg(\Phi^* D) = \deg(\Phi) \deg D $ for any $ D\in \operatorname{Div}(Y) $.

    If $ f\in k $ then $ (f) = 0 $, otherwise $ f\not\in k $ so consider the extension $ L \coloneqq k(f) $. The inclusion $ L \hookrightarrow K(X) $ induces a finite morphism $ \phi: X\to {\mathbf{P}}^1 $ and $ (f) = \phi^{-1}(D) $ where $ D\coloneqq 1[0] - 1[\infty] $, and $ \deg D = 0 $ on $ {\mathbf{P}}^1 $.

    Since $ \phi $ is a finite morphism of curves, we have $ \deg (f) = \deg(\phi^* D) = \deg(\phi)\cdot 0 = 0 $.

- What is a **rational curve**?

    Birational to $ {\mathbf{P}}^1 $, equivalently admits distinct points $ p, q $ with $ p\sim q $.

- Give an example of a curve that is not rational.

    Take $ y^2 = x^3-x $ and homogenize to $ y^2z = x^3-xz^2 $.

- What is a **reduced** divisor? An irreducible divisor?

    Reduced: $ n_i = 1 $ for all $ i $. Irreducible: $ n_i = 1 $ for exactly one $ i $.

- What is a **Cartier** divisor?

    A global section $ s\in H^0(X; {\mathcal{K}}^{\times}/{\mathcal{O}}^{\times}) $, described by an open cover $ U_i\rightrightarrows X $, $ f_i \in H^0(U_i; {\mathcal{K}}^{\times}) $, and $ {f_i\over f_j}\in H^0(U_{ij}; {\mathcal{O}}^{\times}) $.

    Equivalently, a locally principal Weil divisor.

- What is a **principal** Cartier divisor?

    Anything in the image of $ H^0({\mathcal{K}}^{\times}) \to H^0({\mathcal{K}}^{\times}/{\mathcal{O}}^{\times}) $.

- When do Weil and Cartier divisors coincide?

    $ X $ integral, separated, Noetherian, locally factorial (all local rings are UFDs). In this case, principal Weil divisors coincide with principal Cartier divisors.

- Give an example of a Weil divisor that is not Cartier.

    Take $ X = V(xy-z^2) \subseteq {\mathbf{A}}^3 $ and let $ Y $ be its ruling $ \left\{{ p\in Y{~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}y=z=0}\right\} $. Then $ Y $ can not be locally principal in a neighborhood of the cone point. However, $ 2Y $ is locally principal and in fact principal. The divisor $ D=V(x,z) $ is not of the form $ V = (f) $ for any $ f\in K(X) $ near the origin.

- What is an **ample divisor**?

    $ {\mathcal{L}} $ is ample iff $ {\mathcal{L}}^n $ is very ample for some $ n $, so defines an embedding $ \phi_{{\left\lvert {{\mathcal{L}}} \right\rvert}}: X\to {\mathbf{P}}^N $ where $ {\mathbf{P}}^N \cong {\mathbf{P}}H^0(X; {\mathcal{L}}^n) {}^{ \vee } $.

- What is a **nef divisor**?

    $ D $ is nef iff $ D\cdot C \geq 0 $ for all curves iff $ {\mathcal{O}}(D) $ is nef iff $ {\mathcal{L}}\coloneqq{\mathcal{O}}(D) $ has positive degree over every curve.

    For $ D\in {\mathbf{Q}}{\hbox{-}}\operatorname{CDiv}(X) $ and $ Z\leq X $ a proper subvariety, $ D $ is nef along $ Z $ iff $ D.C \coloneqq\deg_{\tilde C}(f^* D) \geq 0 $ where $ f: \tilde C\to C $ is the normalization, for all effective curves $ C\subseteq Z $.

- What is a **big divisor**?

    $ D $ is big iff $ h^0({\mathcal{O}}(mD)) \geq { \mathsf{O}}(m^{\dim X}) $.

- What is a **simple normal crossings (SNC)** divisor?

    Normal crossings: A Weil divisor $ D = \sum D_i $ is NC iff for every $ x\in X $ a local equation for $ D $ is $ \prod_{i=1}^r x_i $ for independent local parameters $ x_i\in {\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $. SNC is if every $ D_i $ is smooth and $ r\leq n $.

    Equivalently, $ D $ is SNC if there exists a finite family of sections $ \left\{{f_i}\right\} \subseteq H^0({\mathcal{O}}_X) $ such that $ D = \sum (f_i) $ and for each $ x\in \mathop{\mathrm{supp}}D $, the restrictions $ (f_i)_x \in {\mathfrak{m}}_x $ land in the maximal ideal and form part of a regular system of parameters for $ {\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $.\

- Give examples and non-examples of SNC divisors.

    A nodal curve is NC but not SNC (NC need not have smooth components).

- What is the **divisor of zeros and poles** of $ f \in k(X)^{\times} $?

    Writing $ Z_f, P_f $ for the sets of zeros and poles, $ (f) = \sum n_i Z_i - \sum m_i P_i $ where $ n_i $ is the multiplicity of the zero $ Z_i $ (and similarly $ m_i $ for $ P_i $ the order of the pole).

- What is the **Picard group**?

    Isomorphism classes of invertible sheaves under $ \otimes $.

    Equivalently, $ H^1(X; {\mathcal{O}}_X^{\times}) $.

- What is the **invertible sheaf** associated to a Cartier divisor?

    Representing $ D $ as $ \left\{{(U_i, f_i)}\right\} $, $ {\mathcal{L}}(D) \leq {\mathcal{K}} $ is the submodule generated by $ \left\{{f_i^{-1}}\right\} $. There is a bijection between Cartier divisors and invertible subsheaves of $ {\mathcal{K}} $.

- What is the relationship between the Cartier class group and $ \operatorname{Pic}(X) $?

    In general, $ \mathop{\mathrm{Cart}} \operatorname{Cl}(X) \hookrightarrow\operatorname{Pic}(X) $ by $ D\mapsto {\mathcal{L}}(D) $; this is surjective when $ X $ is integral.

- What is the relationship between $ \operatorname{Cl}(X) $ and $ \operatorname{Pic}(X) $?

    Isomorphic when $ X $ is integral, separated, locally factorial.

- What is an **effective** Cartier divisor?

    Represented by $ \left\{{(U_i, f_i)}\right\} $ where each $ f_i\in H^0(U_i, {\mathcal{O}}_{U_i}) $.

- What is the subscheme associated to a Cartier divisor?

    For $ D $ effective, the subscheme $ Y $ of codimension 1 defined by the sheaf of ideals $ {\mathcal{I}}_Y $ which is locally generated by the $ f_i $. In fact $ {\mathcal{I}}_Y \cong {\mathcal{L}}(-D) $ in this case.

- What does it mean for divisors to be **linearly equivalent**?

    $ D_1 - D_2 = (f) $ for some $ f $.

- What does it mean for two divisors to be **numerically equivalent**?

    $ D\sim 0 $ iff $ D\cdot C = 0 $ for every curve $ C\subseteq X $, and $ D_1\sim D_2 \iff D_1- D_2\sim 0 $.

- What is the **degree** of a Weil divisor?

    $ D = \sum_{Y} n_Y Y \implies \deg(D) = \sum_Y n_Y \in {\mathbf{Z}} $.

- What is the **Cartier divisor associated to a section** of an invertible sheaf?

    For $ {\mathcal{L}}\in \operatorname{Pic}(X) $ and $ s\in H^0({\mathcal{L}})\setminus\left\{{0}\right\} $, define $ (s) = \sum_Y v_Y(s) Y $ where $ v_Y $ is defined using $ \sigma: {\mathcal{L}}_{X, V} { \, \xrightarrow{\sim}\, }{\mathcal{O}}_{X, V} $ and $ v_Y(s) \coloneqq v_Y(\sigma(s)) $ where $ {\mathcal{F}}_V \coloneqq{\mathcal{F}}_{\nu_V} $, the stalk at the generic point of $ V $.

- For $ D $ a prime divisor and $ Y\in \mathop{\mathrm{supp}}D $, what is the **multiplicity** of $ Y $ in $ D $?

    $ D = \sum n_{Y_i} Y_i $ and $ Y= Y_j $ for some $ j $ since $ Y\in \mathop{\mathrm{supp}}D $, so $ {\operatorname{mult}}_D(Y) = n_Y $.

- What is the **multiplicity of a Cartier divisor**?

    For $ D $ an effective Cartier divisor on $ C $, let $ f $ be a local equation at $ p $ and define $ \mu_p $ to be the largest $ N $ such that $ f\in {\mathfrak{m}}_p^N \subseteq {\mathcal{O}}_{X, x} $. Note $ \mu_p \geq 1 \iff p\in C $ and $ \mu_p = 1 \iff C $ is smooth at $ p $.

- What is the **support of a Cartier divisor**?

    $ \mathop{\mathrm{supp}}D = {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} $ is the union of poles and zeros of $ D $, i.e. if $ D = \left\{{(U_i, f_i)}\right\} $ and $ D\mapsto \sum_{Y\in \operatorname{Div}(X)} v_Y(f_i) Y $ where $ i $ is any index with $ U_i \cap Y\neq \emptyset $, then $ \mathop{\mathrm{supp}}D = \left\{{Y\in\operatorname{Div}(X) {~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}v_Y(f_i) \neq 0}\right\} $.

    Equivalently, define $ D $ as a line bundle $ {\mathcal{O}}_X(D) $ with a rational section $ s_D $, set $ U \subseteq X $ to be the maximal open set on which $ s_D $ is defined and nonzero, and define $ {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} \coloneqq X\setminus U $.

- For $ D $ a divisor, what is $ {\mathcal{O}}_X(D) $?

    $ \left\{{f\in {\mathcal{O}}_X {~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}(f) + D \geq 0}\right\} $.

- What is a **linear system**?

    Any subspace of a complete linear system.

- What is a **complete linear system**?

    $ {\left\lvert {D} \right\rvert} = \left\{{ D' {~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}D'\sim D}\right\} $

- What is the linear system associated to the canonical divisor $ K_X $?

    $ {\left\lvert {K_X} \right\rvert} = {\mathbf{P}}H^0(X; \omega_X) $.

- What does it mean for a linear system to be **base point free**?

    A point $ p\in X $ is a base point of a linear system $ S $ iff $ p $ is contained in the support of every divisor $ D\in S $. $ S $ is bpf iff it contains no basepoints.

    Equivalently, the corresponding line bundle $ {\mathcal{L}} $ is generated by global sections, where $ S $ corresponds to $ V \subseteq H^0(X; {\mathcal{L}}) $ for some $ {\mathcal{L}}\in \operatorname{Pic}(X) $, since $ p $ is a base point iff $ s_p\in {\mathfrak{m}}_p {\mathcal{L}}_p $ for all $ s\in V $.

- When is the morphism defined by a linear system a closed immersion?

    Separates points and separates tangents: $ \forall p, q\in X $ there exists $ D\in S $ with $ p\in D $ and $ q\not\in D $; given $ p\in X, t\in {\mathbf{T}}_p X $, there is a $ D\in S $ with $ p\in D $ but $ t\not \in {\mathbf{T}}_p(D) \coloneqq\qty{{\mathfrak{m}}_{P, D}/{\mathfrak{m}}_{P, D} } {}^{ \vee } $

- What is the **base locus** of a linear system?

    The union of all base points in $ S $.

- What is the **plurigenus** of a smooth projective variety?

    $ P_d(X) \coloneqq h^0( (\operatorname{det}\Omega_{X/k})^d ) \coloneqq h^0(K_X^d) $. This is a birational invariant, and e.g. $ X $ is not rational if $ P_d(X) > 0 $.

- What is the **irregularity** of a smooth projective variety?

    The hodge number $ q\coloneqq h^{0, 1} = h^1({\mathcal{O}}_X) $.

- What is the Kodaira dimension?

    $ \kappa(X) \coloneqq-\infty $ if $ P_d(X) = 0 $ for all $ d>0 $, otherwise $ \kappa(X) = \min \left\{{k \in {\mathbf{Z}}{~\mathrel{\Big\vert}~}{P_d\over d^k} \leq { \mathsf{O}}(1) }\right\} $ (i.e. the smallest $ k $ for which this is bounded, or the minimal $ k $ so that $ P_d(X) \in { \mathsf{O}}(d^k) $). Generally $ \kappa(X) \in \left\{{-\infty}\right\}\cup[0, \dim X] $.

- What is the **arithemetic genus**? The **geometric genus**?

    $ p_a(X) \coloneqq(-1)^r \qty{\chi({\mathcal{O}}_X) - 1} $ and $ p_g(X) = h^{n, 0} = h^0(\Omega_{X/k}^n) $.

- What is a **hyperplane section**?

    For $ X \subseteq {\mathbf{P}}^n $ projective, the intersection $ X \cap H $ for some hyperplane $ X = V(f) $.

- What is a **polarization**? What is a principal polarization?

    A choice of $ {\mathcal{L}}\in {\operatorname{NS}}(X)^\mathrm{amp} $, where $ {\operatorname{NS}}(X) \coloneqq\operatorname{Pic}(X)/\operatorname{Pic}^0(X) $. Principal if $ \deg {\mathcal{L}}= 1 $.

- What is the **ramification divisor** of a finite morphism $ f:X\to Y $ of smooth projective curves?

    $ R \coloneqq\sum_{p\in X} \mathop{\mathrm{length}}(\Omega_{X/Y})_p \cdot p $.

- What is the **ramification formula** for a finite morphism of curves?

    $ K_X \sim f^* K_Y + R $.

- Prove the ramification formula for canonical divisors.

    For $ f: X\to Y $ ake the cotangent exact sequence

    $$f^* \Omega_{Y/k} \hookrightarrow\Omega_{X/k} \twoheadrightarrow\Omega_{X/Y}$$

    tensor by $ \Omega_{X/k} {}^{ \vee } $ to get

    $$f^* \Omega_{Y/k}\otimes\Omega_{X/k} {}^{ \vee }\hookrightarrow{\mathcal{O}}_X \twoheadrightarrow\Omega_{X/Y} \otimes\Omega_{X/k} {}^{ \vee }$$

    Use that $ \Omega_{X/Y} $ has finite support, so $ \Omega_{X/Y} \cong \Omega_{X/Y} \otimes\Omega_{X/k} {}^{ \vee } $ and

    $$f^* \Omega_{Y/k}\otimes\Omega_{X/k} {}^{ \vee }\hookrightarrow{\mathcal{O}}_X \twoheadrightarrow{\mathcal{O}}_R$$

    but $ \ker({\mathcal{O}}_X \twoheadrightarrow{\mathcal{O}}_R) \cong {\mathcal{L}}(-R) $, so

    $$f^* \Omega_{Y/k} \otimes\Omega_{X/k} {}^{ \vee }\cong {\mathcal{L}}(-R)$$

    and taking associated divisors yields $ f^*K_Y, -K_X, -R $ respectively, so $ f^* K_Y - K_X \sim -R \implies K_X \sim f^* K_Y + R $.

- What is the Riemann-Hurwitz formula for $ f:X\to Y $?

    $ \chi(X) = \deg(f)\cdot \chi(Y) + \deg R \implies 2g_X - 2 = \deg(f)\cdot(2g_Y - 2) + \sum_{p\in X} (e_p - 1) $.

- Can $ {\mathbf{P}}^1 $ admit an unramified cover by a curve?

    No: if $ f: X\to {\mathbf{P}}^1 $ is a finite etale cover of degree $ n \geq 1 $ then $ \deg R = 0 $, so by Riemann-Hurwitz $ \chi(X) = n\chi({\mathbf{P}}^1) \implies 2g_X - 2 = n(-2) \leq -2 \implies g_X \leq 0 $, so this forces $ g_X = 0 $ and $ n=1 $, so $ f $ must be the identity.

- What is the **ramification index**?

    For $ f:X\to Y $ a morphism of curves and $ p\in X $, letting $ q\coloneqq f(p) $ and $ t\in {\mathcal{O}}_{Y, q} $ be a local coordinate, define $ e_p \coloneqq v_p (f^\sharp(t)) $ where $ f^\sharp: {\mathcal{O}}_{Y, q} \to {\mathcal{O}}_{X, p} $.

- What is a **branch point**? A **ramification point**?

    $ e_p = 1\implies $ unramified, $ e_p > 1 \implies p $ is ramified and $ q\coloneqq f(p) $ is a branch point.

- What is an **etale morphism**?

    For varieties: locally finite and unramified.

    Flat and unramified

    Formally etale and of finite presentation, where $ f\in \mathsf{CRing}(A, B) $ is formally etale iff $ {\mathbb{L}}_{B/A} \simeq 0 $.

- What is the **branch locus**?

    For $ f:X\to Y $, the set of critical values in $ Y $. Compare to the ramification locus in $ X $, which is its preimage.

- What is the result of taking determinants in an exact sequence?

    $ A\to B \to C $ a SES in $   {}_{{\mathcal{O}}_X}{\mathsf{Mod}} $ yields $ \operatorname{det}(A) \otimes_{{\mathcal{O}}_X} \operatorname{det}(C) \cong \operatorname{det}(B) $.

- Discuss ampleness of divisors on curves.

    If $ \deg D \geq 2g $, $ D $ is bpf, and if $ \deg D \geq 2g+1 $ then $ D $ is very ample.

- What is a **canonical divisor**?

    A divisor $ K_X $ defined by any meromorphic section of $ \omega_{X/k} $.

- What is the statement of **Riemann-Roch**?

    $ h^0({\mathcal{L}}(D)) - h^0({\mathcal{L}}(K-D)) = \deg(D) + (1-g) $.

- What is $ \deg(K_X) $ for $ X $ a curve?

    $ \deg K_X = 2g-2 $; Take $ D\coloneqq K_X $ in RR and use that $ h^0({\mathcal{L}}(K)) = g $ and $ h^0({\mathcal{L}}(0)) = 1 $ to get $ g-1 $ on the LHS and $ \deg(K_X) + (1-g) $.

- What is a **very ample sheaf**?

    $ {\mathcal{L}}\in   {}_{{\mathcal{O}}_X}{\mathsf{Mod}} $ invertible is very ample relative to $ f:X\to Y $ if $ \exists {\mathcal{E}}\in {\mathsf{QCoh}}(Y) $ and an immersion $ \iota: X\to {\mathbf{P}}({\mathcal{E}}) $ such that $ {\mathcal{L}}\cong \iota^* {\mathcal{O}}_{{\mathbf{P}}({\mathcal{E}})}(1) $.

- What is an **ample sheaf**?

    For any $ {\mathcal{F}}\in {\mathsf{QCoh}}(X)^\mathrm{ft} $, the twist $ {\mathcal{F}}(n) \coloneqq{\mathcal{F}}\otimes{\mathcal{L}}{ {}^{ \scriptstyle\otimes_{}^{n} }  } $ is globally generated for all $ n> N_0 \gg 0 $.
